# Master's thesis 
The final product can be found [here](https://github.com/eidzei/Gradu/blob/master/AnttiJussi_Kallio_Pro_gradu_2019.pdf)

## Abstract
Eutrophication is a global challenge, where biogeochemical processes in bottom sediments play a key role. Yet, eutrophication science lacks understanding of the role of terrestrial matter on the processes that mobilize or immobilize phosphorus, a central algal nutrient, in sea sediments. Eroded field soil is carried into sea by runoff and soil is settled on the bottom and then buried. During burial the sediment microbial processes change the redox-conditions which affect the chemistry of settled soil. Here, methods were developed to follow the evolution of the chemical state of soil during burial with iron K-edge X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy. The chemical state of soil, and especially the chemistry of iron is linked to the release and binding of phosphorus in bottom sediments [1].
   The chemical path of field soil was simulated by first measuring the absorption spectra of dry soil. The soil was then mixed with sulfate rich sea water. The organic carbon was added to speed up the anaerobic microbial processes and to simulate more reductive conditions in sea bottom. The absorption spectra for Fe were measured after 24 hours and after two months of anaerobic incubation.
   In order to measure the spectra of soil-water mixtures, a sample preparation method was developed, where the sample is jellified. The gel made the suspension uniform and homogeneous. Sample preparation was done in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. We also developed a sample environment for anaerobic measurements, which was motorized and had multiple sample slots.
   The measured spectra were compared with spectra obtained from reference iron compounds and the iron species were quantified. The sulfate and addition of organic carbon enhanced the formation of iron sulfides, causing iron bound phosphorus to be released to water. As expected, the release of phosphorus was higher in anaerobic conditions than in aerobic conditions. The results shed light on iron chemistry in anoxic sediments, which can be used in the management of eutrophication.

## Author
Antti-Jussi Kallio
